The same as the PACIAE 2.0 (Comp. Phys. Comm. 183 (2012) 333) and PACIAE 2.1 
(Comp. Phys. Comm. 184 (2013) 1476) models (packets), the PACIAE 2.2 model 
(packge) also has three versions of PACIAE 2.2a, PACIAE 2.2b, and 
PACIAE 2.2c .  

The PACIAE 2.2a version is used to simulate the relativistic elementary 
collision, such as pp (pbarp), e+e-, and lepton-nucleon DIS. PACIAE 2.2b and 
PACIAE 2.2c are used to simulate the relativistic nuclear-nucleus collision 
(p+A and A+B) as well as lepton-nucleus DIS. PACIAE 2.2b and PACIAE 2.2c are 
similar in the physical contents but are different in the topological 
structure. However we supply a single 'makefile', user can easily run 
the prgram of PACIAE_22a, PACIAE_22b, and PACIAE_22c by a single command of 
'make run_a', 'make run_b', and 'make run_c'), respectively. 

In the PACIAE 2.2b version, the four stages of the partonic initiation, 
partonic evolution (rescattering), hadronization, and the hadronic evolution 
(rescattering) are performed for each hadron-hadron (hh) collision pairs 
independently until all the hh collision pairs are collided. Oppositely, in 
the PACIAE 2.2c version, the partonic initiation is first performed for all 
the hh collision pairs. This full initial partonic state is proceeded to the 
partonic evolution stage, then the hadronization stage, and at last the 
hadronic evolution stage. We refer to the paper of Comp. Phys. Comm. 183 
(2012) 333 for the details.

User can freely download the PACIAE program packet of PACIAE22.tar.gz from 
CPC library. After decompression, you get the files: 'readme', 'makefile', 
all the fortran programs (main_22a.f, parcas_22a.f, sfm_22a.f, coales_22a.f
, hadcas_22a.f p22a.f, main_22b.f parini_22b.f, parcas_22b.f, sfm_22b.f, 
coales_22b.f, hadcas_22b.f p22b.f, main_22c.f parini_22c.f, parcas_22c.f, 
sfm_22c.f, coales_22c.f, hadcas_22c.f p22c.f), paciae_22a required input 
file of usux.dat, and paciae_22b (paciae_22c) required input file of 
usu.dat. In usux.dat there is two parts and the first part is used for 
lepton-nucleon DIS and second part for pp, pbarp, and e+e-. Similary, the 
first part of usu.dat is for lepton-nucleus DIS and second part for p+A and
A+B collisions.

Reading carefuly the input file of usux.dat (usu.dat) is first required. 
According to the studied reaction system you may proceed as follows:
 1. Moving the lines in usux.dat (usu.dat) properly (cf. 'Note' in input 
    file for details).
 2. Setting the variables concerning to reaction system, such nap, nzp, nat,
    nzt, ee(win), ipden, itden, etc. properly.
 3. Fitting the main model parameters of adj1(1), adj1(6), adj1(7), adj1(10), 
    and ddt (in usu.dat only) to the experimental (rapidity) multiplicity 
    data. The first testing values for those parameters may suggect:
     1.0, 0.30, 0.58, 1.0 in usux.dat;
     1.5, 0.30, 1.70, 1.5, 0.0003 in usu.dat for p+Au and Au+Au at RHIC 
      energies;
     2.0, 0.30, 1.00, 2.0, 0.00007 in usu.dat for p+Pb and Pb+Pb at LHC 
      energies.
    Here please note: the multiplicity increases with adj1(1) (adj1(6),  
     adj1(10), ddt) increasing, but with adj1(7) decreases. 
 4. Fitting other model parameters according to physics investigated if 
    necessary, such as fit adj1(31) - adj1(34) for the study of strange 
    production. 
 5. Generating the event by command of 'make run_a', or 'make run_b' or 
    'make run_c'.
      
The output files are:
 1. main.out is PYTHIA type output, where the last line is the sum of the 
    charge number and four-moentum of particles generated in a event.
 2. rms0.out records values of input variables.
 3. rms.out is the main output author intersted.    

We strogly suggest that user writes its own main program, either to record 
every event with p(j,1) - p(j,4) (four-momentum of j-th particle, j=1,N, N 
refers to the total number of particles generated) and v(j,1) - v(j,3) 
(three-coordinate) in the common block of 'pyjets' for off-line analysis 
later, or to do on-line analysis direct. Note three-coordinate here should be 
boosted relative to the coordinate of center of mass of all the particles. 
For lepton-nucleon and lepton-nucleus DIS the common block of 'sa21' is also 
needed, becides 'pyjets'.
